adapter,sql: Explain schema for create sink (#22626)
MaterializeInc/materialize: doc/user/content/sql/explain-schema.md

---
title: "EXPLAIN SCHEMA"
description: "`EXPLAIN KEY SCHEMA` or `EXPLAIN VALUE SCHEMA` is used to see the generated schemas for a `CREATE SINK` statement"
menu:
  main:
    parent: commands
---

`EXPLAIN KEY SCHEMA` or `EXPLAIN VALUE SCHEMA` shows the generated schemas for a `CREATE SINK` statement without creating the sink.

{{< warning >}}
`EXPLAIN` is not part of Materialize's stable interface and is not subject to
our backwards compatibility guarantee. The syntax and output of `EXPLAIN` may
change arbitrarily in future versions of Materialize.
{{< /warning >}}

## Syntax

{{< diagram "explain-schema.svg" >}}

#### `create_sink_stmt`
[CREATE SINK](/sql/create-sink/)

### Output format

Only `JSON` can be specified as the output format.

Output type | Description
------|-----
**JSON** | Format the explanation output as a JSON object.

## Details

> When creating a `SINK` with `AVRO` format using `CONFLUENT SCHEMA REGISTRY`, Materialize generates avro schemas to publish to the said registry.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When creating a an Avro-formatted Kafka sink, Materialize automatically generates Avro schemas for the message key and value and publishes them to a schema registry.
```

> This command shows what the generated schema would look like without having to create the sink.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This command shows what the generated schemas would look like, without creating the sink.
```

  KEY (c1)
  FORMAT AVRO USING CONFLUENT SCHEMA REGISTRY CONNECTION csr_conn
  ENVELOPE UPSERT;
```

```
                   Schema
--------------------------------------------
 {                                         +
   "type": "record",                       +
   "name": "envelope",                     +
   "doc": "materialize comment on t",      +
   "fields": [                             +
     {                                     +
       "name": "c1",                       +
       "type": [                           +
         "null",                           +
         "int"                             +
       ]                                   +
     },                                    +
     {                                     +
       "name": "c2",                       +
       "type": [                           +
         "null",                           +
         "string"                          +
       ],                                  +
       "doc": "materialize comment on t.c2"+
     }                                     +
   ]                                       +
 }
```

## Privileges

The privileges required to execute this statement are:

> - `USAGE` privileges on the schemas that all relations and types in the query are contained in.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `USAGE` privileges on the schemas that all items in the query are contained in.
```

> - `USAGE` privileges on the relation used in the `CREATE SINK` statement.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `USAGE` privileges on the connections and secrets used in the `CREATE SINK` statement.
```

> - `USAGE` privileges on the relation used in the `CREATE SINK` statement.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
